# Annotated Bibliography

Michael Cui

Source 1: Clover, Jenny. “Food Security in Sub-Saharan Africa.” African Security Review, vol. 12, no. 1, 2003, pp. 5–15., doi:10.1080/10246029.2003.9627566.

Annotation: 
In the article, Jenny Clover focuses on the food security problem in sub-Saharan Africa. In her perspective, food accessibility is one of the most significant human rights, but it has been “frequently and spectacularly violated”. This idea of viewing food security as a human right and substantial freedom perfectly conforms to the definition of human development as stated by Amartya Sen, “Development is a process of expanding the real freedoms that people enjoy.” 

Clover utilizes the datasets mainly from the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) and World Food Program (WFP). Besides directly using data to demonstrate the depth of problem of food security in sub-Saharan Africa, she appeals to linear regression in the statistic model to show the change in undernourished people throughout the world, especially the fraction of those in Africa, which has the highest percentage of undernourished people and has shown the least progress on reducing the prevalence of undernourishment in the last 30 years.

As Sen said in the Development as Freedom, every real unfreedom that hampers human development is interconnected with others. From the passage, Clover analyzes the food security emergency in sub-Saharan Africa in diverse dimensions, including drought and adverse weather patterns and civil conflict, to political-economic crises, HIV/AIDS and poor policy decisions. For instance, the author thinks climate change is one of the most direct factors of food security. By using the dataset from FAO, she predicts that by 2050 an additional 30 million Africans could be affected by famine. Besides, the current food crisis is inextricably deepened by widespread HIV pandemic. From comparing the losing agricultural labor force estimated by the United Nation with the epicenters of the pandemic in Africa, Clover finds that “all dimensions of food security—availability, stability, access, and use of food—are affected where the prevalence of HIV/AIDS is high.” 

The author considered the food crisis uprising in Africa a much more complex problem than a mere weather disaster. One kind of unfreedom will be deteriorated by other unfreedoms. According to Clover, “Planned humanitarian support is not an end in itself.” If Africa wants to acquire sustained access to food, the goal should focus on the structural deficiencies of the approaches to food security and be accompanied by competent and enduring responses to different dimensions of unfreedoms. Finding the balance between solving immediate food aid issues in the long run and strategic considerations demands a multifaceted approach integrating political, economic, social and environmental aspects, and this needs the efforts from the whole world. 
